Metrics Design (#211)
dotnet/designs: accepted/2021/System.Diagnostics/Metrics-Design.md

# Metrics APIs Design

## Overview

> This document is discussing the .NET Metrics APIs design which implements the [OpenTelemetry specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/new_api.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document is discussing the .NET Metrics APIs design which implements the [OpenTelemetry specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/api.md).
```

The proposed APIs will be used by the application or library authors to record metrics measurements. The APIs also include a listener which will allow listening to the recorded measurements events which can be used by the OpenTelemetry SDK (or other potential consumers) to aggregate the measurements and export them.

The proposed APIs are intended to be supported on Full Framework 4.6 and up, .NET Core supported versions, and .NET 5.0 and up. The proposed APIs will be part of the System.Diagnostics.DiagnosticSource package.

```MD040
Naming in this proposal is picked up from the OpenTelemetry specification to avoid having .NET APIs
deviating from the standard even if the standard names are not the best option for the .NET ecosystem.
```

## Metric Terminologies

### Instrument

> The Instrument is the type that will be used by the app and library authors to report measurements (e.g. Counter, Gauge...etc.). The instrument will have a name that should be validated as described in the OpenTelemetry specs. The Instrument can optionally have a description and unit of measurements. Instruments will be created with a numerical type parameter (e.g. `Counter<int>`). The Instrument is going to support all CLS-compliant numerical types which are supported on the Full Framework (Byte, Int16, Int32, Int64, Single, Double, and Decimal).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Instrument is the type that will be used by the app and library authors to report measurements (e.g. Counter, ObservableGauge...etc.). The instrument will have a name that should be validated as described in the OpenTelemetry specs. The Instrument can optionally have a description and unit of measurements. Instruments will be created with a numerical type parameter (e.g. `Counter<int>`). The Instrument is going to support all CLS-compliant numerical types which are supported on the Full Framework (Byte, Int16, Int32, Int64, Single, Double, and Decimal).
```

There are two types of instruments:

- The first type we'll call it just `Instrument` for simplicity. These instruments are called inside a request, meaning they have an associated distributed Context (with Span, Baggage, etc.). OpenTelemetry specs call this type of instrument a synchronous Instrument but we are trying to avoid confusion with the async feature of the .NET. The proposal here proposes two instrument classes of that type: `Counter` and `Histogram`.

> - The second type is called `ObservableInstrument` which reports measurements by a callback, once per collection interval, and lacks Context. OpenTelemetry specs call this type of instrument an asynchronous Instrument but we are trying to avoid confusion with the async feature of the .NET. The proposal here is proposing three instrument classes of that type: `ObservableCounter`, `ObservableGauge`, and `ObservableUpDownCounter`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The second type is called `ObservableInstrument` which reports measurements by a callback, and lacks Context. OpenTelemetry specs call this type of instrument an asynchronous Instrument but we are trying to avoid confusion with the async feature of the .NET. The proposal here is proposing three instrument classes of that type: `ObservableCounter`, `ObservableGauge`, and `ObservableUpDownCounter`.
```

Reviewer: There is discussion in the OpenTelemetry metrics SDK if we allow different frequencies (e.g. callback being invoked every 5 seconds, but the report is only happening every 1 minute or based on the scraper pull).

Given this is the SDK details and not related to the API, I suggest that we remove this.

### Tags

Tag is the term used to refer to a key-value attribute associated with a metric event. Each tag categorizes the metric event, allowing events to be filtered and grouped for analysis.
Current OpenTelemetry specs call it Attributes. We have used the tags name in the tracing APIs and we'll stick with this name for the sake of consistency with tracing.

## APIs Proposal

### Meter Class

```csharp
namespace System.Diagnostics.Metrics
{
    public class Meter : IDisposable
    {

        /// <summary>
        /// The constructor allows creating the Meter class with the name and optionally the version.
        /// The name should be validated as described by the OpenTelemetry specs.
        /// </summary>
        public Meter(string name)  { throw null;  }
        public Meter(string name, string? version) { throw null; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Getter properties to retrieve the Meter name and version
        /// </summary>
        public string Name { get; }
        public string? Version { get; }

        /// <summary>

>         /// Factory Methods to create Counter and Histogram instruments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        /// Factory methods to create Counter and Histogram instruments.
```

        /// </summary>
        public Counter<T> CreateCounter<T>(
                            string name,
                            string? description = null,
                            string? unit = null) where T : unmanaged { throw null; }

        public Histogram<T> CreateHistogram<T>(
                            string name,
                            string? description = null,
                            string? unit = null) where T : unmanaged { throw null; }

        /// <summary>

>         /// Factory Methods to create an observable Counter instrument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        /// Factory methods to create an ObservableCounter instrument.
```

        /// </summary>

        public ObservableCounter<T> CreateObservableCounter<T>(
                            string name,
                            Func<T> observeValue,
                            string? description = null,
                            string? unit = null) where T : unmanaged { throw null; }

        public ObservableCounter<T> CreateObservableCounter<T>(
                            string name,
                            Func<Measurement<T>> observeValue,
                            string? description = null,
                            string? unit = null) where T : unmanaged { throw null; }

        public ObservableCounter<T> CreateObservableCounter<T>(
                            string name,
                            Func<IEnumerable<Measurement<T>>> observeValues,
                            string? description = null,
                            string? unit = null) where T : unmanaged { throw null; }

        /// <summary>

>         /// Factory Methods to create observable gauge instrument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        /// Factory methods to create ObservableGauge instrument.
```

        /// </summary>
        public ObservableGauge<T> CreateObservableGauge<T>(
                            string name,
                            Func<T> observeValue,
                            string? description = null,
                            string? unit = null) where T : unmanaged { throw null; }

        public ObservableGauge<T> CreateObservableGauge<T>(
                            string name,
                            Func<Measurement<T>> observeValue,
                            string? description = null,
                            string? unit = null) where T : unmanaged { throw null; }

        public ObservableGauge<T> CreateObservableGauge<T>(
                            string name,
                            Func<IEnumerable<Measurement<T>>> observeValues,
                            string? description = null,
                            string? unit = null) where T : unmanaged { throw null; }

        /// <summary>

>         /// Factory Methods to create observable UpDownCounter instrument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        /// Factory methods to create ObservableUpDownCounter instrument.
```

        /// <summary>
        /// Publish is to allow activating the instrument to start recording measurements and to allow
        /// listeners to start listening to such measurements.
        /// </summary>
        protected void Publish() { throw null; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Getters to retrieve the properties that the instrument is created with.
        /// </summary>
        public Meter Meter { get; }
        public string Name { get; }
        public string? Description { get; }
        public string? Unit { get; }

        /// <summary>
        /// A property tells if a listener is listening to this instrument measurement recording.
        /// </summary>
        public bool Enabled => throw null;

        /// <summary>
        /// A property tells if the instrument is a regular instrument or an observable instrument.
        /// </summary>
        public virtual bool IsObservable => throw null;
    }
}
```

### Non-observable Instrument Base Class

```csharp
namespace System.Diagnostics.Metrics
{
    /// <summary>
    /// Instrument<T> is the base class from which all non-observable instruments will inherit from.

>     /// Mainly It'll support the CLS compliant numerical types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// Mainly it will support the CLS compliant numerical types.
```

        /// </summary>

        protected void RecordMeasurement(T measurement) { throw null; }

        protected void RecordMeasurement(
                            T measurement,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag) { throw null; }

        protected void RecordMeasurement(
                            T measurement,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag1,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag2) { throw null; }

        protected void RecordMeasurement(
                            T measurement,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag1,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag2,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag3) { throw null; }

        protected void RecordMeasurement(
                            T measurement,
                            ReadOnlySpan<KeyValuePair<string, object?>> tags) { throw null; }
    }
}
```

### Observable Instrument Base class

```csharp
namespace System.Diagnostics.Metrics
{
    /// <summary>
    /// ObservableInstrument<T> is the base class from which all observable instruments will inherit from.

>     /// It will only support the CLS compliant numerical types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// It will only support the CLS compliant numerical types.
```

    /// </summary>
    public abstract class ObservableInstrument<T> : Instrument where T : unmanaged
    {
        /// <summary>
        /// Protected constructor to create the instrument with the common properties.
        /// </summary>
        protected ObservableInstrument(
                    Meter meter,
                    string name,
                    string? description,
                    string? unit) : base(meter, name, description, unit) { throw null; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Observe() fetches the current measurements being tracked by this instrument.
        /// </summary>
        protected abstract IEnumerable<Measurement<T>> Observe();

        public override bool IsObservable => throw null;
    }
}
```

### Measurement class

```csharp

namespace System.Diagnostics.Metrics
{
    /// <summary>

>     /// A measurement stores one observed value and its associated tags. This type is used by Observable instruments' Observe() method when reporting current measurements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// A measurement stores one observed value and its associated tags. This type is used by Observable instruments' Observe() method when reporting current measurements with associated tags.
```

(and delete the next line)

    /// with the associated tags.
    /// </summary>
    public struct Measurement<T> where T : unmanaged
    {
        /// <summary>
        /// Construct the Measurement using the value and the list of tags.
        /// We'll always copy the input list as this is not perf hot path.
        /// </summary>
        public Measurement(T value, IEnumerable<KeyValuePair<string, object?>> tags) { throw null; }
        public Measurement(T value, params KeyValuePair<string, object?>[] tags) { throw null; }
        public Measurement(T value, ReadOnlySpan<KeyValuePair<string, object?>> tags) { throw null; }

        public ReadOnlySpan<KeyValuePair<string, object?>> Tags { get { throw null;  } }
        public T Value { get; }
    }
}
```

### Non-observable Instruments

```csharp
namespace System.Diagnostics.Metrics
{
    /// <summary>

>     /// The counter is a non-observable Instrument that supports non-negative increments.

Reviewer: nit: "non-observable" sounds very weird

    /// e.g. Number of completed requests.
    /// </summary>
    public sealed class Counter<T> : Instrument<T> where T : unmanaged
    {
        public void Add(T measurement) { throw null; }
        public void Add(T measurement,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag) { throw null; }
        public void Add(T measurement,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag1,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag2) { throw null; }
        public void Add(T measurement,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag1,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag2,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag3) { throw null; }
        public void Add(T measurement,
                            ReadOnlySpan<KeyValuePair<string, object?>> tags) { throw null; }
        public void Add(T measurement,
                            params KeyValuePair<string, object?>[] tags) { throw null; }
    }

    /// <summary>
    /// The histogram is a non-observable Instrument that can be used to report arbitrary values

>     /// that are likely to be statistically meaningful. It is intended for statistics such

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// that are likely to be statistically meaningful. It is intended for statistics such as the request duration.
```

(and remove the next line)

# Metrics APIs Design

## Overview

> This document is discussing the .NET Metrics APIs design which implements the [OpenTelemetry specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/api.md).

Reviewer 2: How should I think about these APIs vs the DiagnosticCounter APIs we've been using from System.Diagnostics.Tracing?  When does someone choose these vs EventCounter, PollingCounter, etc.?

Author: We already working on publishing the guide for the users currently using EventCounters. That include, having the tools like dotnet-counters work with new Metrics, migrating from EventCounter to Metrics, and allow migrated libraries/apps from EventCounters to Metrics to implement a small shim for any app compat support if necessary. 

CC @noahfalk @shirhatti

Reviewer 2: Does that mean we're deprecating DiagnosticCounter, changing all of our existing DiagnosticCounters to be based on these new APIs, etc.?  I'm confused.

Author: We'll recommend using Metrics moving forward but we are not deprecating the Event counters in this release at least.

Reviewer 2: So I hope then we're replacing our own usage in .NET 6?

                            string name,
                            Func<IEnumerable<Measurement<T>>> observeValues,
                            string? description = null,
                            string? unit = null) where T : unmanaged { throw null; }

        public void Dispose() { throw null; }
    }
}
```

### Instrument Base Class

```csharp
namespace System.Diagnostics.Metrics
{
    /// <summary>
    /// Is the base class which contains all common properties between different types of instruments.
    /// It contains the protected constructor and the Publish method allows activating the instrument
    /// to start recording measurements.
    /// </summary>

    public abstract class Instrument
    {
        /// <summary>
        /// Protected constructor to initialize the common instrument properties.
        /// </summary>
        protected Instrument(Meter meter, string name, string? description, string? unit) { throw null; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Publish is to allow activating the instrument to start recording measurements and to allow
        /// listeners to start listening to such measurements.
        /// </summary>

>         protected void Publish() { throw null; }

Reviewer 3: Its not clear what is the use case of a protected Publish() method.. when one does meter.CreateCounter/Gauage, won't that be automatically published? 
Do we expect any instrument to not be published?

Author: `Publish` is important to tell when start using the instrument after creating and initializing it. We didn't call it automatically inside the abstract base classes constructors because that means the instrument would be published before it is fully initialized in the concrete classes. When using our built-in instruments, you'll not need to call it manually as it will get called from that instrument's constructors. Publish will be needed if someone introduce a custom instrument. They will need to call it from the constructor at that time.

Reviewer 3: Got it. Somehow I misread it as a something end users need to do.
So for the built-in instruments, simply creating them is enough for end user. 

publish() is mostly for anyone trying to create own instruments.

    public abstract class Instrument<T> : Instrument where T : unmanaged
    {
        /// <summary>
        /// Protected constructor to create the instrument with the common properties.
        /// </summary>
        protected Instrument(Meter meter, string name, string? description, string? unit) :
                        base(meter, name, description, unit) { throw null; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Record measurement overloads allowing passing different numbers of tags.
        /// </summary>

        protected void RecordMeasurement(T val) { throw null; }

        protected void RecordMeasurement(
                            T measurement,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag1) { throw null; }

        protected void RecordMeasurement(
                            T measurement,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag1,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag2) { throw null; }

        protected void RecordMeasurement(
                            T measurement,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag1,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag2,

>                             KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag3) { throw null; }

Reviewer 4: Given our Listener doesn't also support these 1, 2, 3 KVP prototypes. Do we really need these 1, 2, 3 KVP prototypes?
Also, here is the protected versions, so I assume derived classes can convert to ReadOnlySpan<> for us.

Author: The 1, 2, 3 KVPs overloads are needed to avoid creating array parameter.

        public ReadOnlySpan<KeyValuePair<string, object?>> Tags { get { throw null;  } }
        public T Value { get; }
    }
}
```

### Non-observable Instruments

```csharp
namespace System.Diagnostics.Metrics
{
    /// <summary>
    /// The counter is a non-observable Instrument that supports non-negative increments.
    /// e.g. Number of completed requests.
    /// </summary>
    public sealed class Counter<T> : Instrument<T> where T : unmanaged
    {
        public void Add(T measurement) { throw null; }
        public void Add(T measurement,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag1) { throw null; }
        public void Add(T measurement,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag1,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag2) { throw null; }
        public void Add(T measurement,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag1,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag2,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag3) { throw null; }
        public void Add(T measurement,

>                             ReadOnlySpan<<string, object?>> tags) { throw null; }

Reviewer 4: The KeyValuePair<> got dropped!

Reviewer 4: You want to grep these, as it's in multiple places.

        public void Add(T measurement,

>                             params KeyValuePair<string, object?>[] tags) { throw null; }

Reviewer 4: Assuming our end result is ReadOnlySpan<KeyValuePair<>>, I'm wondering if the 1,2,3 KVP prototypes is any faster than a proto that takes param KVP. If it's not faster, then, I don't know we need these 1,2,3 KVP prototypes.

Reviewer 4: Yes. But if our goal is to create ReadOnlySpan<>, we will still need to create an array! So, practically, I'm wondering if there's any difference at this point!

Author: > Yes. But if our goal is to create ReadOnlySpan<>, we will still need to create an array! So, practically, I'm wondering if there's any difference at this point!

No, we don't need to create array for that. we'll just store the values on the stack and create the ReadOnlySpan from that.

    /// recorded measurements.
    /// </summary>
    public class MeterListener : IDisposable
    {
        /// <summary>
        /// Simple constructor
        /// </summary>
        public MeterListener() { throw null;  }

        /// <summary>
        /// Callbacks to get notification when an instrument is published
        /// </summary>
        public Action<Instrument, MeterListener>? InstrumentPublished { get; set; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Callbacks to get notification when stopping the measurement on some instrument
        /// this can happen when the Meter or the Listener is disposed of. Or calling Stop()
        /// on the listener.
        /// </summary>
        // This need some clarification
        public Action<Instrument, object?>? MeasurementsCompleted { get; set; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Start listening to a specific instrument measurement recording.
        /// </summary>
        public void EnableMeasurementEvents(Instrument instrument, object? state = null) { throw null; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Stop listening to a specific instrument measurement recording.
        /// </summary>

>         public void DisableMeasurementEvents(Instrument instrument) { throw null; }

Reviewer 4: Do you want to return the state?

Author: I think this will be a good idea.

        /// <summary>
        /// Set a callback for a specific numeric type to get the measurement recording notification
        /// from all instruments which enabled listened to and was created with the same specified
        /// numeric type. If a measurement of type T is recorded and a callback of type T is registered, that callback is used. If there is no callback for type T but there is a callback for type object, the measured value is boxed and reported via the object typed callback. If there is neither type T callback nor object callback then the measurement will not be reported.
        /// </summary>

>         public void SetMeasurementEventCallback<T>(MeasurementCallback<T>? measurementCallback) { throw null; }

Reviewer 4: Given MeasurementCallback is a delegate, do you intend to only allow one callback, or multiple?

Author: It will be one callback per numeric type.

        /// numeric type. If a measurement of type T is recorded and a callback of type T is registered, that callback is used. If there is no callback for type T but there is a callback for type object, the measured value is boxed and reported via the object typed callback. If there is neither type T callback nor object callback then the measurement will not be reported.
        /// </summary>
        public void SetMeasurementEventCallback<T>(MeasurementCallback<T>? measurementCallback) { throw null; }

        public void Start() { throw null; }
        public void Stop() { throw null; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Call all Observable instruments to get the recorded measurements reported to the
        /// callbacks enabled by SetMeasurementEventCallback<T>
        /// </summary>
        public void RecordObservableInstruments() { throw null; }

        public void Dispose() { throw null; }
    }
}
```

### Library Measurement Recording Example

```csharp
    Meter meter = new Meter("io.opentelemetry.contrib.mongodb", "v1.0");
    Counter<int> counter = meter.CreateCounter<int>("Requests");
    counter.Add(1);

>     counter.Add(1, KeyValuePair<string, object>("request", "read"));

Reviewer 4: I think you need `new` KeyValuePair<>

# Metrics APIs Design

## Overview

This document is discussing the .NET Metrics APIs design which implements the [OpenTelemetry specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/new_api.md).

The OpenTelemetry Metrics APIs support reporting measurements about the execution of a computer program at run time. The Metrics APIs are designed explicitly for processing raw measurements, generally with the intent to produce continuous summaries of those measurements, efficiently and simultaneously.

> The OpenTelemetry architecture is splitting the measurement reporting part to a component called `APIs` and that is the part we are discussing here and proposing APIs for it. The other part is called `SDK` which will monitor, aggregate the Metrics measurements, and export the aggregated measurement to some backend. The SDK part will be implemented in the OpenTelemetry [dotnet repo](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet) and will not part of the .NET. The `SDK` will depend on the APIs we are going to expose in .NET.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OpenTelemetry architecture is splitting the measurement reporting part to a component called `APIs` and that is the part we are discussing here and proposing APIs for it. The other part is called `SDK` which will monitor, aggregate the Metrics measurements, and export the aggregated measurement to some backend. The SDK part will be implemented in the [OpenTelemetry .NET repo](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet) and will not be part of the .NET. The `SDK` will depend on the APIs we are going to expose in .NET.
```

> The proposed APIs will be used by the application or Library authors to record metrics measurements. The APIs also include a listener which will allow listening to the recorded measurements events which can be used by the OpenTelemetry SDK to aggregate the measurements and export them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposed APIs will be used by the application or library authors to record metrics measurements. The APIs also include a listener which will allow listening to the recorded measurements events which can be used by the OpenTelemetry SDK (or other potential consumers) to aggregate the measurements and export them.
```

> The proposed APIs will be used by the application or Library authoress to record metrics measurements. The APIs also include a listener which will allow listening to the recorded measurements events which can be used by the OpenTelemetry SDK to aggregate the measurements and export them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The proposed APIs will be used by the application or Library authors to record metrics measurements. The APIs also include a listener which will allow listening to the recorded measurements events which can be used by the OpenTelemetry SDK to aggregate the measurements and export them.
```

> The proposed APIs are intended to be supported on Full Framework 4.6 and up, .NET Core all versions, and .NET 5.0 and up.

Reviewer 3: .NET Core 2.1/3.1 and above?

Author: I think we can reword it as all supported .NET Core versions instead.

Reviewer 3: yea. I want to specifically ask about .NET Core 2.1 which will be out-of-support in August, before .NET 6.
So the support would be:
.NET Framework 4.6 and above
.NET Core 3.1
.NET 5 and above

Author: Officially we'll support the versions that are not out of support yet. But, Systsem.Diagnostics.Diagnostics source support netstandard2.0 which will make it work with net core 2.1.

Reviewer 3: That remind - could you add in the intro that this new API will be part of DiagnosticSource package itself.

```MD040
Naming in this proposal is picked up from the OpenTelemetry specification to avoid having .NET APIs

> deviating from the standard even if the standard names are not the best to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
deviating from the standard even if the standard names are not the best option for the .NET ecosystem.
```

There are two types of instruments:

- The first type we'll call it just `Instrument` for simplicity. These instruments are called inside a request, meaning they have an associated distributed Context (with Span, Baggage, etc.). OpenTelemetry specs call this type of instrument a synchronous Instrument but we are trying to avoid confusion with the async feature of the .NET. The proposal here proposes three instrument classes of that type: `Counter`, `UpDownCounter`, and `Histogram`.
- The second type is called `ObservableInstrument` which reports measurements by a callback, once per collection interval, and lacks Context. OpenTelemetry specs call this type of instrument an asynchronous Instrument but we are trying to avoid confusion with the async feature of the .NET. The proposal here is proposing three instrument classes of that type: `ObservableCounter`, `ObservableGauge`, and `ObservableUpDownCounter`.

### Meter

Meter is the factory type responsible for creating Instruments. Meter will have a name and optional version strings.

### Listener

> The listener is the type that allows listening to the recorded measurements occurred by both the non-observable instrument and the observable instrument. The listener is an important class that will be used by OpenTelemetry to implement the Metrics SDK.

Reviewer: The "non-observable instrument" sounds a bit weird 🧙

Author: agree. do you have a better name I can use here? I am trying to avoid using the `sync/async` terms.

Reviewer: Perhaps "The listener is the type that allows listening to the measurements reported by the instruments (e.g. `Counter`, `ObservableCounter`, etc.)."

> The listener is the type that allows listening to the recorded measurements occurred by both the non-observable instrument and the observable instrument. The listener is an important class that will be used by OpenTelemetry to implement the Metrics SDK.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The listener is the type that allows listening to the measurements recorded by instruments. The listener is an important class that will be used by OpenTelemetry to implement the Metrics SDK.
```

### Tags

Tag is the term used to refer to a key-value attribute associated with a metric event. Each tag categorizes the metric event, allowing events to be filtered and grouped for analysis.

> Current OpenTelemetry specs call it Labels but this is going to change to Attributes. We have used the tags name in the tracing APIs and we'll stick with this name for the sake of consistency with tracing.

Reviewer: It is already changed to attributes. Please refer to [this issue](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/1113) which is already closed as resolved.

Author: Thanks, I'll update the doc accordingly.

        public ObservableCounter<T> CreateObservableCounter<T>(
                            string name,
                            Func<Measurement<T>> observeValue,
                            string? description = null,
                            string? unit = null) where T : unmanaged { throw null; }

        public ObservableCounter<T> CreateObservableCounter<T>(
                            string name,
                            Func<IEnumerable<Measurement<T>>> observeValues,
                            string? description = null,
                            string? unit = null) where T : unmanaged { throw null; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Factory Methods to create observable gauge instrument.
        /// </summary>
        public ObservableGauge<T> CreateObservableGauge<T>(
                            string name,
                            Func<T> observeValue,
                            string? description = null,
                            string? unit = null) where T : unmanaged { throw null; }

        public ObservableGauge<T> CreateObservableGauge<T>(
                            string name,

>                             Func<Measurement<T>> observeValues,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                            Func<Measurement<T>> observeValue,
```

                            string? description = null,
                            string? unit = null) where T : unmanaged { throw null; }

        public ObservableGauge<T> CreateObservableGauge<T>(
                            string name,
                            Func<IEnumerable<Measurement<T>>> observeValues,
                            string? description = null,
                            string? unit = null) where T : unmanaged { throw null; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Factory Methods to create observable UpDownCounter instrument.
        /// </summary>
        public ObservableUpDownCounter<T> CreateObservableUpDownCounter<T>(
                            string name,
                            Func<T> observeValue,
                            string? description = null,
                            string? unit = null) where T : unmanaged { throw null; }

        public ObservableUpDownCounter<T> CreateObservableUpDownCounter<T>(
                            string name,

>                             Func<Measurement<T>> observeValues,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                            Func<Measurement<T>> observeValue,
```

        /// listeners to start listening to such measurements.
        /// </summary>
        protected void Publish() { throw null; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Getters to retrieve the properties that the instrument is created with.
        /// </summary>
        public Meter Meter { get; }
        public string Name { get; }
        public string? Description { get; }
        public string? Unit { get; }

        /// <summary>
        /// A property tells if a listener is listening to this instrument measurement recording.
        /// </summary>
        public bool Enabled => throw null;

        /// <summary>
        /// A property tells if the instrument is a regular instrument or an observable instrument.
        /// </summary>
        public virtual bool IsObservable => throw null;
    }
}
```

### Non-observable Instrument Base Class

```csharp
namespace System.Diagnostics.Metrics
{
    /// <summary>
    /// Instrument<T> is the base class from which all non-observable instruments will inherit from.
    /// Mainly It'll support the CLS compliant numerical types
    /// </summary>

>     public abstract class Instrument<T> : Instrument where T : unmanaged

Reviewer 3: Where does the validation for T occurs? Will api validate that it'll be one of the numerical types? Or is that left to the SDK?

Author: the validation will be done in the API level and not the SDK.

Reviewer 4: How do you intend to report errors?

Author: I think Exception throwing for non-supported types would be reasonable here. I don't expect someone will use some non-supported type without testing it :-)

    {
        /// <summary>
        /// Protected constructor to create the instrument with the common properties.
        /// </summary>

>         protected Instrument(Meter meter, string name, string? description, string? unit) :

Reviewer 3: It'd be possible for anyone to create new instruments by inheriting Instrument<T>? (like MyTimingGauge : Instrument<T>
{
RecordTime() --> internally calling RecordMeasurement().
}

Author: they can do that if they inherit from `Instrument<T>` and internally calling RecordMeasurement. But if they inherit from `Instrument`, they will not be able to report the measurements.

                        base(meter, name, description, unit) { throw null; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Record measurement overloads allowing passing different numbers of tags.
        /// </summary>

        protected void RecordMeasurement(T val) { throw null; }

        protected void RecordMeasurement(
                            T val,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object> tag1) { throw null; }

        protected void RecordMeasurement(
                            T val,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object> tag1,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object> tag2) { throw null; }

        protected void RecordMeasurement(
                            T val,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object> tag1,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object> tag2,

>                             KeyValuePair<string, object> tag3) { throw null; }

Reviewer 3: I hope we can add overloads for upto 5, if we see most common cases requires upto 5.

Author: do you have any data suggesting how many tags usually used in the common scenarios? I am asking because I want to avoid APIs which not going to be used. We still have the option in the future to add those if proven it is really needed. Also, we have the overload which take ReadOnlySpan<> which can help when need to use more labels.

Reviewer 3: No I dont have any data. 
I was just asking, if we do find data (or feedback from otel community) that more is required, would we be flexible to add more.

Author: Yes, if we see a demand on that for sure we consider adding them.

        protected void RecordMeasurement(
                            T val,
                            ReadOnlySpan<KeyValuePair<string, object>> tags) { throw null; }
    }
}
```

### Observable Instrument Base class

```csharp
namespace System.Diagnostics.Metrics
{
    /// <summary>
    /// ObservableInstrument<T> is the base class from which all observable instruments will inherit from.
    /// Mainly It'll support the CLS compliant numerical types
    /// </summary>
    public abstract class ObservableInstrument<T> : Instrument where T : unmanaged
    {
        /// <summary>
        /// Protected constructor to create the instrument with the common properties.
        /// </summary>
        protected ObservableInstrument(
                    Meter meter,
                    string name,
                    string? description,
                    string? unit) : base(meter, name, description, unit) { throw null; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Observe will report the non-additive values of the measurements.
        /// </summary>
        protected abstract IEnumerable<Measurement<T>> Observe();

>     }

Reviewer 3: I assume this will override IsObservable => return true..

Author: that is right.

}
```

### Measurement class

```csharp

namespace System.Diagnostics.Metrics
{
    /// <summary>

>     /// A helper class used by the Observable instruments Observe method to repro the measurement values

Reviewer: repro -> report?

    /// with the associated tags.
    /// </summary>
    public struct Measurement<T> where T : unmanaged
    {
        /// <summary>
        /// Construct the Measurement using the value and the list of tags.
        /// We'll always copy the input list as this is not perf hot path.
        /// </summary>

>         public Measurement(T value, IEnumerable<KeyValuePair<string, object>> tags) { throw null; }

Reviewer 4: Do `object` here need to be nullable as `object?`

Reviewer 4: Should we allow null object?

Author: yes. we already allow that in tags used in tracing.

Author: I found I already correctly annotated it in `public ReadOnlySpan<KeyValuePair<string, object?>> Tags { get { throw null;  } }` but missed the annotations in the other places. Thanks for the catch.

        public Measurement(T value, params KeyValuePair<string, object?>[] tags) { throw null; }

        public ReadOnlySpan<KeyValuePair<string, object?>> Tags { get { throw null;  } }
        public T Value { get; }
    }
}
```

### Non-observable Instruments

```csharp
namespace System.Diagnostics.Metrics
{
    /// <summary>
    /// The counter is a non-observable Instrument that supports non-negative increments.
    /// e.g. Number of completed requests.
    /// </summary>
    public class Counter<T> : Instrument<T> where T : unmanaged
    {
        public void Add(T measurement) { throw null; }
        public void Add(T measurement,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object> tag1) { throw null; }
        public void Add(T measurement,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object> tag1,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object> tag2) { throw null; }
        public void Add(T measurement,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object> tag1,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object> tag2,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object> tag3) { throw null; }
        public void Add(T measurement,

>                             params KeyValuePair<string, object>[] tags) { throw null; }

Reviewer 4: Do we want to take a ReadOnlySpan<KeyValuePair<string,Object>> as well? Since we return ReadOnlySpan in the Measurment.Tags

Author: I think this would be a good idea. at least can allow passing a range of items inside the array. I'll add that overload.

Author: Just to tell, I'll add a constructor overload which take ReadOnlySpan to the `Measurement<T>` struct.

    }

    /// <summary>
    /// UpDownCounter is a non-observable Instrument that supports increments and decrements.
    /// e.g. Number of items in a queue.
    /// </summary>
    public class UpDownCounter<T> : Instrument<T> where T : unmanaged
    {
        public void Add(T measurement) { throw null; }
        public void Add(T measurement,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object> tag1) { throw null; }
        public void Add(T measurement,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object> tag1,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object> tag2) { throw null; }
        public void Add(T measurement,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object> tag1,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object> tag2,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object> tag3) { throw null; }

>         public void Add(T measurement,

Reviewer 4: This signature looks EXACTLY like Counter<T>. The main difference is that Add() takes a negative number in UpDownCounter<T>. For clarity, does it make sense in .NET to use Increment() and Decrement()?

PS: I know the OTel spec says Add().

Author: I prefer `Add` here as it will accept positive and negative values and that will be legitimate. But using Increment/Decrement and pass negative values that will be undesired. I know we do the same with Counter as it supposes to get positive values only but at least with UpDownCounter we are reducing this problem when we use `Add` :-)

Reviewer 4: So, what do you do if I Add(-10) in a Counter<long>?

Reviewer: Give it to @cijothomas and let him handle it 😄

Reviewer 4: LOL. I agree. Chuck it as the SDK!

    /// <summary>
    /// ObservableUpDownCounter is an observable Instrument that reports additive value(s)
    /// when the instrument is being observed.
    /// e.g. the process heap size
    /// </summary>
    public class ObservableUpDownCounter<T> : ObservableInstrument<T> where T : unmanaged
    {
        protected override IEnumerable<Measurement<T>> Observe() { throw null; }
    }

    /// <summary>
    /// ObservableGauge is an observable Instrument that reports non-additive value(s)
    /// when the instrument is being observed.
    /// e.g. the current room temperature
    /// </summary>
    public class ObservableGauge<T> : ObservableInstrument<T> where T : unmanaged
    {
        protected override IEnumerable<Measurement<T>> Observe() { throw null; }
    }
}
```

### MeterListener

```csharp
namespace System.Diagnostics.Metrics
{
    /// <summary>
    /// A delegate to represent the callbacks signatures used in the listener.
    /// </summary>
    public delegate void MeasurementCallback<T>(
                            Instrument instrument,
                            T measurement,
                            ReadOnlySpan<(string TagName, object TagValue)> tags,

>                             object? cookie);

Reviewer 3: whats cookie?

Reviewer: state object

Reviewer 3: Got it.. Not the real 🍪 😄

There are two types of instruments:

- The first type we'll call it just `Instrument` for simplicity. These instruments are called inside a request, meaning they have an associated distributed Context (with Span, Baggage, etc.). OpenTelemetry specs call this type of instrument a synchronous Instrument but we are trying to avoid confusion with the async feature of the .NET. The proposal here proposes three instrument classes of that type: `Counter`, `UpDownCounter`, and `Histogram`.
- The second type is called `ObservableInstrument` which reports measurements by a callback, once per collection interval, and lacks Context. OpenTelemetry specs call this type of instrument an asynchronous Instrument but we are trying to avoid confusion with the async feature of the .NET. The proposal here is proposing three instrument classes of that type: `ObservableCounter`, `ObservableGauge`, and `ObservableUpDownCounter`.

### Meter

Meter is the factory type responsible for creating Instruments. Meter will have a name and optional version strings.

> ### Listener

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### MeterListener
```

        /// </summary>
        public bool Enabled => throw null;

        /// <summary>
        /// A property tells if the instrument is a regular instrument or an observable instrument.
        /// </summary>
        public virtual bool IsObservable => throw null;
    }
}
```

### Non-observable Instrument Base Class

```csharp
namespace System.Diagnostics.Metrics
{
    /// <summary>
    /// Instrument<T> is the base class from which all non-observable instruments will inherit from.
    /// Mainly It'll support the CLS compliant numerical types
    /// </summary>
    public abstract class Instrument<T> : Instrument where T : unmanaged
    {
        /// <summary>
        /// Protected constructor to create the instrument with the common properties.
        /// </summary>
        protected Instrument(Meter meter, string name, string? description, string? unit) :
                        base(meter, name, description, unit) { throw null; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Record measurement overloads allowing passing different numbers of tags.
        /// </summary>

        protected void RecordMeasurement(T val) { throw null; }

        protected void RecordMeasurement(

>                             T val,

Reviewer 4: nit: val => measurement

                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag1) { throw null; }

        protected void RecordMeasurement(
                            T val,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag1,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag2) { throw null; }

        protected void RecordMeasurement(
                            T val,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag1,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag2,
                            KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag3) { throw null; }

        protected void RecordMeasurement(
                            T val,
                            ReadOnlySpan<KeyValuePair<string, object?>> tags) { throw null; }
    }
}
```

### Observable Instrument Base class

```csharp
namespace System.Diagnostics.Metrics
{
    /// <summary>
    /// ObservableInstrument<T> is the base class from which all observable instruments will inherit from.

>     /// Mainly It'll support the CLS compliant numerical types

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    /// It will only support the CLS compliant numerical types
```

    /// </summary>
    public abstract class ObservableInstrument<T> : Instrument where T : unmanaged
    {
        /// <summary>
        /// Protected constructor to create the instrument with the common properties.
        /// </summary>
        protected ObservableInstrument(
                    Meter meter,
                    string name,
                    string? description,
                    string? unit) : base(meter, name, description, unit) { throw null; }

        /// <summary>

>         /// Observe will report the non-additive values of the measurements.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
        /// Observe() fetches the current measurements being tracked by this instrument.
```
(The text about non-additive appears arbitrary, there are additive observable instruments as well)

        /// </summary>
        protected abstract IEnumerable<Measurement<T>> Observe();

        public override bool IsObservable => throw null;
    }
}
```

### Measurement class

```csharp

namespace System.Diagnostics.Metrics
{
    /// <summary>

>     /// A helper class used by the Observable instruments Observe method to report the measurement values

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    /// A measurement stores one observed value and its associated tags. This type is used by Observable instruments' Observe() method when reporting current measurements. 
```

                        KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag1) { throw null; }
        public void Record(
                        T measurement,
                        KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag1,
                        KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag2) { throw null; }
        public void Record(
                        T measurement,
                        KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag1,
                        KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag2,
                        KeyValuePair<string, object?> tag3) { throw null; }
        public void Record(T measurement,
                            ReadOnlySpan<<string, object?>> tags) { throw null; }
        public void Record(
                        T measurement,
                        params KeyValuePair<string, object?>[] tags) { throw null; }
    }
}

```

### Observable Instruments

```csharp
namespace System.Diagnostics.Metrics
{
    /// <summary>
    /// ObservableCounter is an observable Instrument that reports monotonically increasing value(s)
    /// when the instrument is being observed.
    /// e.g. CPU time (for different processes, threads, user mode or kernel mode).
    /// </summary>

>     public class ObservableCounter<T> : ObservableInstrument<T> where T : unmanaged

Reviewer 5: Should we seal all these derived instrument implementations? We haven't planned for any scenarios where users would directly extend them and I assume we could always unseal them in the future if a new scenario emerged.

Author: agree. it make sense to seal them.

Author: @noahfalk 
The question now about the listener. can you think in any scenario someone would need to extend it? if not, then we can seal it too.

Reviewer 5: I don't see any reason the listener needs to be extendable and I'd be fine to seal it for now. At best I could see scenarios where it is mildly more convenient for the user to extend the listener rather than aggregating it, but I don't see a reason why we need to prioritize it up-front.

Author: I sealed the listener too.

    /// <summary>
    /// ObservableUpDownCounter is an observable Instrument that reports additive value(s)
    /// when the instrument is being observed.
    /// e.g. the process heap size
    /// </summary>
    public class ObservableUpDownCounter<T> : ObservableInstrument<T> where T : unmanaged
    {
        protected override IEnumerable<Measurement<T>> Observe() { throw null; }
    }

    /// <summary>
    /// ObservableGauge is an observable Instrument that reports non-additive value(s)
    /// when the instrument is being observed.
    /// e.g. the current room temperature
    /// </summary>
    public class ObservableGauge<T> : ObservableInstrument<T> where T : unmanaged
    {
        protected override IEnumerable<Measurement<T>> Observe() { throw null; }
    }
}
```

### MeterListener

```csharp
namespace System.Diagnostics.Metrics
{
    /// <summary>
    /// A delegate to represent the callbacks signatures used in the listener.
    /// </summary>
    public delegate void MeasurementCallback<T>(
                            Instrument instrument,
                            T measurement,
                            ReadOnlySpan<KeyValuePair<string, object?>> tags,

>                             object? cookie);

Reviewer 5: @tarekgh - do you know if it is common for us to name data like this 'cookie'? I am fine with it as-is, but if there is a better convention such as calling it 'state', 'userData', 'userState', 'userToken', etc. I am glad to change it. For example I see [Timer](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.threading.timer.-ctor?view=net-5.0#System_Threading_Timer__ctor_System_Threading_TimerCallback_System_Object_System_Int32_System_Int32_) and [WaitCallback](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.threading.waitcallback?view=net-5.0) call their similar parameter 'state'

Author: I don't think we have a design guideline to name such parameter more than 

✔️ [DO use descriptive parameter names.](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/design-guidelines/naming-parameters)

But trying to look at more cases like: [contextcallback](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.threading.contextcallback?view=net-5.0), [SendOrPostCallback](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.threading.sendorpostcallback?view=net-5.0), and [WaitOrTimerCallback](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.threading.waitortimercallback?view=net-5.0) and I am seeing it is using the name `state`. Considering that, I'll change the name from cookie to state.

Reviewer 3: `state` sounds better.

        /// </summary>
        public Action<Instrument>? InstrumentPublished { get; set; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Callbacks to get notification when stopping the measurement on some instrument
        /// this can happen when the Meter or the Listener is disposed of. Or calling Stop()
        /// on the listener.
        /// </summary>
        // This need some clarification
        public Action<Instrument, object?>? MeasurementsCompleted { get; set; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Start listening to a specific instrument measurement recording.
        /// </summary>
        public void EnableMeasurementEvents(Instrument instrument, object? cookie = null) { throw null; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Stop listening to a specific instrument measurement recording.
        /// </summary>
        public void DisableMeasurementEvents(Instrument instrument) { throw null; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Set a callback for a specific numeric type to get the measurement recording notification
        /// from all instruments which enabled listened to and was created with the same specified

>         /// numeric type.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
        /// numeric type. If a measurement of type T is recorded and a callback of type T is registered, that callback is used. If there is no callback for type T but there is a callback for type object, the measured value is boxed and reported via the object typed callback. If there is neither type T callback nor object callback then the measurement will not be reported.
```

        /// </summary>
        public void SetMeasurementEventCallback<T>(MeasurementCallback<T>? measurementCallback) { throw null; }

        public void Start() { throw null; }
        public void Stop() { throw null; }

        /// <summary>
        /// Call all Observable instruments to get the recorded measurements reported to the
        /// callbacks enabled by SetMeasurementEventCallback<T>
        /// </summary>
        public void RecordObservableInstruments() { throw null; }

        public void Dispose() { throw null; }
    }
}
```

### Library Measurement Recording Example

```csharp
    Meter meter = new Meter("io.opentelemetry.contrib.mongodb", "v1.0");
    Counter<int> counter = meter.CreateCounter<int>("Requests");
    counter.Add(1);
    counter.Add(1, KeyValuePair<string, object>("request", "read"));
```

### Listening Example

```csharp
    InstrumentListener listener = new InstrumentListener();
    listener.InstrumentPublished = (instrument) =>
    {
        if (instrument.Name == "Requests" && instrument.Meter.Name == "io.opentelemetry.contrib.mongodb")
        {

>             listener.EnableMeasurementEvents(instrument, null);

Reviewer 4: nit: Ideally, we don't have to capture listener in this closure.

Author: Actually, @noahfalk had it before passing the MeterListener object to the `InstrumentPublished` callback and we thought it is not really needed. Thinking more about and expecting users will need to call `EnableMeasurementEvents` inside the `InstrumentPublished`, I have returned it back so users can avoid capture the listener in the closure.

        }
    };

>     listener.SetMeasurementEventCallback<int>((instrument, measurement, labels, cookie) =>

Reviewer 4: labels => tags
